memory-bank/progress.md, before:

# Progress: Document Processing Pipeline

## Current Status: Performance Optimization Phase

The project has advanced to a mature implementation with all core components and several advanced features in place. The focus has shifted to optimizing performance, implementing streaming support for large documents, and enhancing concurrency controls for high-volume document processing.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    Design[Design Phase] --> Implementation[Core Implementation] --> Features[Advanced Features] --> Performance[Performance Optimization] --> Documentation[Documentation] --> Release[Initial Release]
    
    style Design fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Implementation fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Features fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Performance fill:#fbb,stroke:#f33,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    style Documentation fill:#fbb,stroke:#f33,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    style Release fill:#fff,stroke:#999
```

## What Works
- ✅ Document class with complete data structure, validation, and efficient children management
- ✅ DocumentState class with equality, hash implementation, and string representation caching
- ✅ Transition class for state transitions with callable validation
- ✅ DocumentType with state machine definition, transition caching, and final state identification
- ✅ AsyncDocStore with SQLAlchemy async extension support
- ✅ Parent-child relationship tracking with optimized database operations
- ✅ Flexible query capabilities for document retrieval
- ✅ State transition execution via AsyncDocStore.next() with concurrency controls
- ✅ Comprehensive processing functions implementation with robust error handling
- ✅ Complete working RAG example with full pipeline execution
- ✅ Connection pooling with configurable settings
- ✅ Streaming support for large document content
- ✅ Batch processing capabilities for improved performance
- ✅ Database indexes and optimized query patterns
- ✅ Comprehensive logging utilities
- ✅ Performance monitoring with `@async_timed()` decorator
- ✅ Async context manager support for proper resource cleanup
- ✅ Document counting functionality
- ✅ Type validation with Pydantic models
- ✅ Proper async cleanup with dispose() method

## In Progress
- 🔄 Further optimization of database queries for high-volume use cases
- 🔄 Enhancing streaming capabilities for large document handling
- 🔄 Implementing more sophisticated concurrency controls
- 🔄 Creating comprehensive API documentation
- 🔄 Developing more examples for custom pipelines

## What's Left to Build
- Additional document format support (PDF, DOCX, HTML)
- Monitoring system for pipeline execution
- Database migration strategy for schema changes
- Performance benchmarks for measuring improvements
- More sophisticated chunking strategies
- Telemetry and performance metrics collection
- Improved error recovery mechanisms
- Network error handling and retries
- Cancellation support for long-running operations
- More comprehensive test suite for edge cases

## Known Issues
- 🐛 Some database queries might not be fully optimized for very large document sets
- 🐛 Memory usage during large document processing needs further optimization
- 🐛 Need to improve error recovery for certain edge cases
- 🐛 Connection pooling settings might need tuning for different workloads

## Next Milestones

1. **Performance Optimization Completion (Current)**
   - Complete database query optimizations
   - Finalize streaming implementation
   - Tune connection pooling settings
   - Benchmark performance improvements

2. **Additional Format Support (Next Sprint)**
   - PDF processor implementation
   - DOCX processor implementation
   - HTML processor with content extraction
   - Format detection and automatic conversion

3. **Monitoring and Observability (Next Sprint)**
   - Pipeline execution monitoring
   - Performance metrics collection
   - Visualization of document processing flow
   - Error tracking and reporting

4. **Documentation and Examples (Ongoing)**
   - Complete API documentation
   - Usage examples for common scenarios
   - Performance tuning guidelines
   - RAG integration examples with different embedding models

Commit message:

feat: multiprocessing to run transitions

memory-bank/progress.md, after:

# Progress: Document Processing Pipeline

## Current Status: Performance Optimization Phase

The project has advanced to a mature implementation with all core components and several advanced features in place. The focus has shifted to optimizing performance, implementing streaming support for large documents, and enhancing concurrency controls for high-volume document processing.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    Design[Design Phase] --> Implementation[Core Implementation] --> Features[Advanced Features] --> Performance[Performance Optimization] --> Documentation[Documentation] --> Release[Initial Release]
    
    style Design fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Implementation fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Features fill:#bbf,stroke:#33f,stroke-width:2px
    style Performance fill:#fbb,stroke:#f33,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    style Documentation fill:#fbb,stroke:#f33,stroke-width:2px,stroke-dasharray: 5 5
    style Release fill:#fff,stroke:#999
```

## What Works
- ✅ Multiprocessing for CPU-intensive operations (embedding, chunking)
- ✅ Process pool management with automatic worker scaling
- ✅ Intelligent CPU/IO operation detection for optimal processing strategy
- ✅ Cross-process serialization for document objects
- ✅ Document class with complete data structure, validation, and efficient children management
- ✅ DocumentState class with equality, hash implementation, and string representation caching
- ✅ Transition class for state transitions with callable validation
- ✅ DocumentType with state machine definition, transition caching, and final state identification
- ✅ AsyncDocStore with SQLAlchemy async extension support
- ✅ Parent-child relationship tracking with optimized database operations
- ✅ Flexible query capabilities for document retrieval
- ✅ State transition execution via AsyncDocStore.next() with concurrency controls
- ✅ Comprehensive processing functions implementation with robust error handling
- ✅ Complete working RAG example with full pipeline execution
- ✅ Connection pooling with configurable settings
- ✅ Streaming support for large document content
- ✅ Batch processing capabilities for improved performance
- ✅ Database indexes and optimized query patterns
- ✅ Comprehensive logging utilities
- ✅ Performance monitoring with `@async_timed()` decorator
- ✅ Async context manager support for proper resource cleanup
- ✅ Document counting functionality
- ✅ Type validation with Pydantic models
- ✅ Proper async cleanup with dispose() method

## In Progress
- 🔄 Further optimization of database queries for high-volume use cases
- 🔄 Enhancing streaming capabilities for large document handling
- 🔄 Implementing more sophisticated concurrency controls
- 🔄 Creating comprehensive API documentation
- 🔄 Developing more examples for custom pipelines

## What's Left to Build
- Additional document format support (PDF, DOCX, HTML)
- Monitoring system for pipeline execution
- Database migration strategy for schema changes
- Performance benchmarks for measuring improvements
- More sophisticated chunking strategies
- Telemetry and performance metrics collection
- Improved error recovery mechanisms
- Network error handling and retries
- Cancellation support for long-running operations
- More comprehensive test suite for edge cases

## Known Issues
- 🐛 Some database queries might not be fully optimized for very large document sets
- 🐛 Memory usage during large document processing needs further optimization
- 🐛 Need to improve error recovery for certain edge cases
- 🐛 Connection pooling settings might need tuning for different workloads

## Next Milestones

1. **Performance Optimization Completion (Current)**
   - Complete database query optimizations
   - Finalize streaming implementation
   - Tune connection pooling settings
   - Benchmark performance improvements

2. **Additional Format Support (Next Sprint)**
   - PDF processor implementation
   - DOCX processor implementation
   - HTML processor with content extraction
   - Format detection and automatic conversion

3. **Monitoring and Observability (Next Sprint)**
   - Pipeline execution monitoring
   - Performance metrics collection
   - Visualization of document processing flow
   - Error tracking and reporting

4. **Documentation and Examples (Ongoing)**
   - Complete API documentation
   - Usage examples for common scenarios
   - Performance tuning guidelines
   - RAG integration examples with different embedding models
